Update check-if-woo-is-active.md (#44306)
woocommerce/woocommerce: docs/extension-development/check-if-woo-is-active.md

tags: how-to
---

When developing for WooCommerce, it's important to check that WooCommerce is installed and active before your own code runs. This ensures no errors occur from missing WooCommerce functions or classes.

There are a few methods to achieve this. The most reliable approach is to initiate your code on `plugins_loaded`. This means you can be sure that WooCommerce has already initiated, by checking if one of its core classes exists.

```php
add_action( 'plugins_loaded', 'prefix_plugins_loaded' );

function prefix_plugins_loaded() {
	// Check if the "WooCommerce" class exists. If not, exit early.
	if ( ! class_exists( 'WooCommerce' ) ) {
		return;

> 	}

Reviewer: This is essentially the same as hooking into `do_action( 'woocommerce_loaded' )` which is already executed on the `plugins_loaded` hook? Why not recommend it?

https://github.com/woocommerce/woocommerce/blob/f383284ba6dbef974be52d1fbf1e68f6517530fe/plugins/woocommerce/includes/class-woocommerce.php#L208

Reviewer 2: I don't think `WooCommerce::on_plugins_loaded()` is called. If that is the case the `woocommerce_loaded` action won't fire

Author: @henrywright It's called via an action hook `add_action( 'plugins_loaded', array( $this, 'on_plugins_loaded' ), -1 );`

**Note**: At this stage, WordPress has not yet initialized the current user data.

> Another method is to execute your code on the `woocommerce_init` action. This is executed right _after_ WooCommerce is active and initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another method is to execute your code on the `woocommerce_init` action. This is executed right _after_ WooCommerce is active and initialized. This action (and the `before_woocommerce_init` action) fires in the context of the WordPress `init` action so at this point current user data has been initialized.
```

```

> Another route you could take is to initiate your code on the `woocommerce_init` hook. We know this only runs when WooCommerce is active and initiated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another route you could take is to initialize your code on the `woocommerce_init` hook. We know this only runs when WooCommerce is active and initialized.
```

Reviewer 3: Optional thing—if this makes the doc too complex or is veering off track, feel free to ignore—but it could be worth adding a section that talks about version comparison. That is, highlighting this sort of approach:

```php
add_action( 'woocommerce_init', function () {
	// Only continue if we have access to version 8.7.0 or higher.
	if ( version_compare( wc()->version, '8.7.0', '<' ) ) {
		return;
	}

	// OK, we're good to go... (add rest of code here)
} );
```

This could be useful for folks who depend on functionality added after version x.y.z, or just as a subtle way to encourage version-awareness.

Reviewer 4: I think we should include this - it's useful information that isn't included anywhere else

```php
add_action( 'woocommerce_init', 'prefix_woocommerce_init' );

function prefix_woocommerce_init() {
	// Custom code here. WooCommerce is active and initiated...

> }

Reviewer: There is also `before_woocommerce_init` which could be used (and execution is on the init hook but _right before_ all WooCommerce initiatlizes).

```

However, in some cases you may want to check if WooCommerce exists *before* `plugins_loaded`. This method is slightly less reliable, because it assumes the path of the WooCommerce plugin hasn't been changed. It's also worth noting that this method may run _before or after_ WooCommerce is ready; meaning you may not be able to utilize WooCommerce functions yet.

```php
// Test to see if WooCommerce is active (including network activated).

$plugin_path = trailingslashit( WP_PLUGIN_DIR ) . 'woocommerce/woocommerce.php';

if (
	in_array( $plugin_path, wp_get_active_and_valid_plugins() ) ||
	in_array( $plugin_path, wp_get_active_network_plugins() )
) {
	// Custom code here. WooCommerce is active, however it has not

> 	// necessarily initialized...

Reviewer: I'd prefer to leave this out of the docs. I don't know of any case where WooCommerce availability needs to happen sooner than `plugins_loaded` and the caveats are too risky. If you know of a great reason for leaving it in, I'm all ears :)

Reviewer 2: `wp_get_active_and_valid_plugins()` and `wp_get_active_network_plugins()` are intended to be private functions. I don't think these should be encouraged
